Recovery from abuse — whether it’s political,
religious, occupational, domestic —
involves the same fundamental process.
Targets have to restore what the abuse eroded
sometimes almost into non-existence:
their sense of self.
That involves reasserting the freedoms
and entitlements they’ve gone without
looking after their own welfare
refusing to accept unfair responsibility
getting comfortable expressing
needs they’ve previously suppressed
and ending destructive relationships.
Targets have to replace old self-negating
thoughts of inferiority and unworthiness
with new self-affirming principles.
As we know, terms from psychology
like ‘paranoid’, ‘unconscious’,
‘passive aggressive’
that find their way into common usage
aren’t always applied accurately.
Or therapeutically.
Often they’re used to attack
and falsely pathologise people.
In a similar way
as therapeutic self-affirming principles
have become more widely known,
they’ve been seized on by abusers
and twisted into weaponised parodies.
Sentiments intended to repair
damage are used to inflict damage.
Concepts intended to promote
equal freedoms and entitlements
are used to assert unequal liberties and licence.
When malignant abusers speak of valuing themselves
of exercising autonomy, of resisting suppression
it all sounds very reasonable
until we realise that for them valuing
themselves means devaluing others
exercising autonomy means
restricting the autonomy of others
suppression means not being
given special priority.
These pseudo-self-affirmations illustrate why
even when targets and malignant
abusers speak the same words
they’re often using very different languages.
Targets who work to establish a level
playing field show a lateral orientation
where people can coexist side by side.
This is literally at cross purposes with abusers
who show a vertical orientation
constantly working to elevate
themselves above others
sometimes because of a personal superiority complex
sometimes because some
religious or political ideology
encourages them to look down on other people
sometimes a combination of the above.
As targets strive for equity
abusers strive for inequity.
As targets work to restore balance
abusers work to restore imbalance.
For targets, the vertical orientation
of the abuser is oppressive.
Their needs, freedoms,
individuality, sense of self
are all squashed down to accommodate the abuser.
In a perverse mirror image of this
abusers claim the lateral orientation
of targets is oppressive to them.
From their elevated position, equality
and fairness seem diminishing.
While the target’s claim of
oppression is consistent with reality
the abuser’s is not.
The abuser’s claim of oppression
doesn’t represent some alternative
but equally valid ‘truth’.
It’s the bogus product of a misconception
one that inspires equally bogus
attempts at self-affirmation.
Some of these pseudo-self-affirmations
are easily dismissed.
But others are more slippery
sometimes exploiting poorly
conceived mental health concepts.
For some targets, trying to get a grip
on them is like trying to hold wet soap.
I want to look at some examples that
crop up repeatedly in correspondence.
It was around 15 years ago
that I was sat in my front room
listening to a house guest I’ll call Vigo
ranting about how his father
owed him unconditional love.
Apparently his father had
refused contact for several days
in response to constant abuse from Vigo
who believed he should be free
to behave any way he wanted
towards his father and that his father was obliged
to respond with an uninterrupted stream of love.
Vigo showed no remorse and minimised his abuse
with various titbits of
Christmas-cracker philosophy.
He pontificated that real love
was ‘messy’ and ‘painful’.
Odd how it always seemed to be his
father who got the pain and mess.
Vigo’s shrill sermon on unconditional love
was one of my first glimpses
of a rampant narcissism
that for a time flew under my radar.
Unconditional love is a
term I could happily consign
to the trash can of history.
It’s presented as the answer to conditional love —
love that’s only given if targets
comply with various selfish demands.
If they don’t —if they don’t
choose a particular career
if they don’t choose the right partner
if they don’t follow certain
religious or political beliefs
love is withdrawn.
People subjected to this iffy brand of love
often fail to develop a stable
internal sense of worth.
They come to depend on unstable external supply
only feeling fleeting experiences of worth
when they fulfil the demands of other people.
Self-affirming therapy and literature
promote ‘unconditional love’
as the healthy alternative to this coercion.
Targets are told they should
be loved for who they are
without having conditions imposed on them.
Unfortunately abusive individuals like Vigo
have also latched on to this
poorly articulated concept
insisting they should be loved for who they are
without having conditions imposed on them.
Conditions like taking
responsibility for their actions
showing remorse, offering restitution
and rectifying their behaviour.
We’re back to the fundamental
conflict in orientation.
We have targets pursuing equal status
seeking only to eliminate oppressive
conditions that violate their freedoms.
And we have abusers pursuing superior status
seeking to eliminate all conditions placed on them
but happy to impose conditions on others.
Some of the most extreme examples
are found in religious scripture.
The god character of the Bible
was depicted perpetrating all kinds of atrocities
from the explicit endorsement of sexual slavery
to the joyful celebration of mass infanticide
to the implementation of death sentences
for a raft of victimless activities
including working on the Sabbath
and approaching a tabernacle.
Despite its profound disregard for life
this morally chaotic god character
demanded unquestioning love.
The love it offered in return
was strictly conditional
only bestowed if its commands were obeyed
although even then, love
was by no means guaranteed.
It’s worth mentioning a similar
weaponised self-affirmation
we might call ‘unconditional attraction’
where individuals insist other
people should find them attractive.
People who don’t are accused of
prejudice and\or pathologised.
Meanwhile these self-aggrandising individuals
have no problem labelling
other people unattractive.
The concept of love without any conditions
is an unworkable foundation for relationships
even as a two-way model.
Placing no conditions on each other
means whatever we do — however good or bad —
is of no consequence.
No part of us is rejected
but no part of us is valued either.
Lecturer in political philosophy Derek Edyvane
underscores the problem:
‘.... a large part of what we value
‘about being the object of another’s love
‘is that we take it to imply
an informed and positive
‘(or at least not negative)
‘objective evaluation of our character.
‘We think of love as being more
‘than the arbitrary expression
of a subjective whim.
‘We want to know that there exist reasons
‘that can render this person’s love
for us intelligible to others.’
What meaning could someone’s love
have for us if we could be anybody?
Healthy love isn’t love without conditions.
It’s love with boundaries.
Boundaries give a clear structure that preserves
the freedoms and entitlements of both parties.
A common characteristic of
unhealthy and abusive relationships
is that identities become blurred and merged.
Individuals become lost in each other
no longer able to separate
their own preferences, beliefs, desires, needs.
Firm boundaries prevent this kind of enmeshment
allowing people to maintain
a separate sense of self.
None of us is owed love.
We either inspire it in some people or we don’t.
Those who don’t inspire it often try to compel it.
But the use of compulsion in itself
turns any potential love into a degraded pretence.
Targets of abuse are routinely
blamed for their abusers’ feelings
— their jealousy, anger, resentment, sorrow —
and taught that it’s their responsibility
to keep their abusers happy.
Over time, targets often become acutely sensitised
to other people’s emotional states
and instinctively take on the
burden of looking after them.
Self-affirming therapy and
literature encourages targets
to question this misguided sense of liability
and to realise they don’t control
the emotional states of other people
and it’s not their job to fix them.
They’re not responsible for
other people’s feelings.
This self-affirmation has been seized on
and repurposed by abusive individuals
who use it to try and avoid
accountability for their actions.
When targets have an emotional
reaction to their mistreatment
their abuser tells them: ‘I’m not
responsible for your feelings.’
And they’re absolutely right.
Just as we can’t control their emotional states
they can’t control ours.
For some targets this feels like a stumper.
They struggle to refute their
abusers’ slippery insinuation
that if they’re not responsible
for the target’s feelings
they can’t be accused of abuse.
The focus on feelings here
is a complete red herring.
People have all kinds of reactions to abuse.
Some people shut down
completely and show no emotion.
In assessing whether a situation is abusive
we don’t base our judgement on
people’s emotional reactions.
We ask if there are persistent patterns
of controlling and coercive behaviour
that violate their freedoms and entitlements.
Are there attempts to isolate them?
Are their private communications monitored?
Is their physical appearance dictated?
Are their job opportunities sabotaged?
Are their finances restricted?
Are their resources exploited?
Are shaming tactics used?
Are there threats of violence?
These are the factors that define abuse
and incriminate individuals in law.
As noted by the UK’s Crown Prosecution Service
— an official legal body that determines
which cases make it to court —
‘Domestic abuse does not always
have to be physical to be prosecuted
‘— sometimes victims may not
even be aware it is happening.’
Agreeing with our abusers
that they’re not responsible
for our feelings doesn’t in any way
deny their accountability for what they do.
In fact, realising our abusers
don’t and can’t control our feelings
is often a key moment in recovery.
Targets of abuse often lose their spontaneity.
They fall into fixed habitual responses.
Abusers learn these predictable responses.
And when they provoke one of those responses
the target feels controlled.
But that sense of being controlled begins to fade
when targets change their responses.
For some years in my childhood
an abusive relative always seemed able
to control me with the same threat:
‘If you don’t do X, you and I are gonna fall out.’
Hearing that line, like clockwork,
I’d fall into silent compliance.
Then one day, I found myself replying
‘Yeah. We will fall out.’
The look of bewilderment was priceless.
Those five words transformed our relationship.
We both knew the threat had lost its power
and it was never used again.
But more importantly, I
began to recognise the part
my own fixed responses played
in my sense of being controlled.
Targets of abuse often become so hyper-focused
on attending to their abusers’ demands
they habitually neglect their own needs.
Self-affirming therapy and literature
encourage targets to exercise self-care.
Predictably the concept of self-care
has been weaponised by abusive individuals
who use it to justify selfish indulgence.
During my training as a therapist
a fellow student I’ll call
Zane repeatedly tried to impose
his values, his ideas, his
preferences on the rest of the group.
To justify his demands
he’d regurgitate the same phrase ad nauseam:
‘I’m just looking after my needs!’
If his demands weren’t met, he’d
often refuse to participate.
An example.
During the course Zane complained repeatedly
about students using adult
language in his presence.
He said it was course and offensive.
One day, in a group discussion
he declared we all had an obligation
to use what he called ‘genteel language’
— ie refined and respectable.
It was pointed out to him
that no one had consented
to any language restrictions
and it wasn’t his place to tell
people how to express themselves.
I was curious what he’d do
when he started seeing clients.
Unlike Zane, I’d already found a work placement
in a therapy centre and I
recounted some of the language
used by my own clients in recent sessions.
Hearing the words he flinched in disgust.
I asked him how he thought clients
would respond to his disapproval.
Did he think they’d keep coming?
After a long pause, he changed the subject.
Despite the intensely
introspective nature of the course
Zane showed little self-reflection
and remained a disruptive presence to the end
interrupting and sabotaging exercises
to assert his petty personal preferences
in the name of self-care.
For individuals like Zane
exercising self-care translates
to demanding care from others
expecting everyone else to forego
their freedoms and entitlements
for the comfort of one individual.
Instead of attempting personal growth
they expect the world to shrink.
Targets of abuse and
manipulation are often trained
to stay perpetually on the defensive;
to always be ready to give
convincing justifications
for any action or lack of action
any word spoken or unspoken
any belief or thought expressed or unexpressed.
As part of recovery, targets are
encouraged to reject this interrogation;
to acknowledge that where
their actions and beliefs
don’t impose on anyone else’s basic freedoms
they have nothing to justify.
They don’t have to explain themselves.
Predictably, this self-affirmation
is abused by some individuals
to try and deny accountability.
For many abusers
no matter how vicious or
destructive their behaviour might be
the idea of being answerable to people they regard
as inferior and subordinate is insulting.
Again, the way this statement is used
by targets and abusers illustrates
their different orientations.
Targets use it to assert their equal freedoms.
Abusers use it to gain special licence.
And again, some of the most extreme examples
are found in religious scripture.
As mentioned earlier, the god character depicted
in the stories of the Bible was a fickle figure.
Even its most obedient
followers were savagely abused
like the blameless god-fearing Job
whose children were murdered and who was stripped
of his health and property
as a test of his devotion.
When the devastated Job had the audacity
to complain about the callous
destruction of his life
he was subjected to one of the most
drawn-out narcissistic rants in the Bible
— chapters full of the god character
boasting about its amazing divine powers
including a bizarre section listing the many ways
it could dominate a sea monster called leviathan.
The message is clear.
The god character doesn’t have to explain itself
not because it has nothing to answer for
but because it’s more powerful than Job.
This is the definition of totalitarianism.
To defend this tyranny
analogies are often made with parents
who sometimes behave in ways
that might superficially
appear mean to their children
but that’s only because they’re
too young to understand.
The obvious problem with this defence
is that abusive parents
— who are deliberately mean to their children —
can use exactly the same line:
‘You’re just too young to understand’.
So how do children distinguish between
apparently mean and actually
mean and protect themselves?
According to the ‘just too
young’ argument, they don’t.
They just have to take it
— until they’re old enough
to figure out they were abused.
The ‘just too young’ argument
is massively overstated.
The fact that children are asking a question
is a sign they’re ready for some kind of answer
even a partial one.
We don’t need to overwhelm them with information.
We can hand it to them a piece at a time,
pausing to see if they’re
satisfied — or ready for more.
To give them nothing
— to angrily dismiss their attempts
to understand as Job was dismissed —
is to leave them to fill in the blanks
with very predictable
child-like fears and misgivings.
Would any loving parent want that?
Would any loving god want that?
One of the most basic methods we use
to help distinguish apparent
meanness from actual meanness
is to give individuals the
opportunity to explain themselves.
Whether it’s in domestic
life, at work, in criminal law
we understand there are
sometimes surprising contexts
behind destructive behaviour.
We often extend each other
a presumption of innocence.
But that presumption has limits.
If someone refuses to offer a
mitigating account for a destructive act
we don’t just presume an innocent
motive and drop the issue
If we did, anyone charged with a crime
could simply refuse to explain
themselves and they’d be free to walk.
Destructive acts have to be accounted for
whether they’re human or divine.
In the absence of any explanation
the act is all we have to go on.
And it’s on that basis that
we have to form our judgement.
Humans or gods who refuse to explain themselves
are entirely responsible for the judgements
made about their destructive acts.
Abusive relationships are
often full of projection.
Targets are routinely accused of harbouring
beliefs, desires, schemes and
motives they don’t possess.
Their abusers are just projecting
their own fantasies onto them
reflecting the abusers’ own
hang-ups, ignorance and vanities.
On the flip side, when
targets confront their abusers
with accurate negative perceptions
they’re accused of projecting their own issues.
Self-affirmation work
involves separating ourselves
from other people’s fantasies.
Sometimes easier said than done.
Abusers often deliver their projections
with such forceful unshakeable conviction
some targets privately wonder if
maybe there’s some truth in them.
There’s nothing wrong in wondering that.
Quite the opposite.
It shows you’re open to hearing critical feedback.
Without that openness, we can
never get to know ourselves.
And getting to know ourselves is crucial
if we’re ever to separate
the truth about ourselves
from the fantasies about us.
In my first introductory course to therapy
a great instructor called Jenna
articulated her approach to
receiving critical feedback.
She said, ‘If you tell me
something critical about myself
‘that I don’t recognise, I’ll
hold it with me for a time.
‘Reflect on it. See if I
can see what you’re seeing.
‘If I find there’s some truth in what you say,
‘I’ll gratefully take it on board.
‘You’ve taught me something about myself.
‘But if I find there isn’t any
truth, then I’m looking at you.
‘And I’m wondering what issues you have
‘that you’re trying to offload on me.’
Of course we don’t need to reflect long and hard
on every bit of critical feedback we get.
When people claim the reason for my atheism
is that I’m angry with their gods
I know instantly they’re wrong.
I feel no more anger towards their gods
than I do towards vampires, gorgons, wendigoes
or any other unsubstantiated mythical character.
People make this false charge
of anger for various reasons.
Some just can’t conceive of individuals
not believing in their gods.
Some are just brainlessly parroting the charge
they’ve seen other people making.
And of course some are
playing very deliberate games
trying to irritate and provoke.
But whatever their reason, in every case
I immediately know they’re talking rubbish.
Because I know that part of myself.
The Johari window is a tool used to reflect
on the parts of us that
are either known or unknown
to ourselves and others.
Named after its creators,
Joe Luft and Harry Ingham
it divides the individual into four basic areas.
The ‘open’ or public self is the part of us
that’s accessible to everyone
—ourselves and others.
Its opposite, the ‘unknown’
self, is the part no one knows.
It contains elements that may
or may not emerge at some stage
but for the time being fail
to register with anyone
— including ourselves.
The ‘unaware’ self is the part of us
that others can see — but we can’t.
This part contains a mix of elements
including aspects of ourselves we
just haven’t bothered to look at
but also aspects we actively distort or deny
because they don’t fit with our self-image.
Finally, the ‘private’ or hidden
self is the part known only to us.
This part’s also been called the ‘façade’.
But that carries associations of deception
and privacy doesn’t entail deception.
Self-awareness work reduces
the unaware and unknown parts
bringing them into consciousness.
Cultivating self-awareness isn’t easy.
It demands rigorous honesty,
openness and integrity.
We might not appreciate some of
the parts of ourselves we discover.
They might arouse powerful resistances.
Which is why self-awareness
work is often most effective
in neutral or supportive environments
where our defences are more relaxed.
The more work we do in this area
the more realistic our self-image becomes
the more we immunise ourselves
against false fantasies
from others or ourselves.
We can’t force self-awareness on each other.
It’s something we have to want for ourselves.
Many people are irretrievably invested
in some idealised fantasy self
and they’ll continue to project their shortcomings
onto others until the bitter end.
But as targets get to know themselves
those bogus projections will
begin to simply fall off them
like water off glass.
‘Unless we resolve things, none of us will heal.’
This statement ticks lots of positive boxes.
It suggests a far-reaching concern
for everyone’s mental health.
It acknowledges the existence of issues
and affirms the need to sort through them
if any progress is to be made
not just sweep them unresolved
under the rug and forget about them.
And it seems to reflect a
lateral egalitarian orientation
calling for peaceful cooperation and coexistence.
In some cases of substantial ongoing hostilities
— including civil and sectarian conflict —
these sentiments are very real.
There’s a genuine intention to
work together to address grievances
and restore previously eroded principles
of responsibility, self-control, justice.
But sometimes this statement has
nothing to do with cooperation.
Many targets hear it after
ending an abusive relationship
or when they’re walking out the door.
Their abusers realise the threats that
once kept them in line no longer work.
So in a last-ditch effort to exert some influence
they dangle therapeutic concepts
like resolution, healing, closure, unity.
Sometimes this message is
delivered by someone else
a family member, mutual acquaintance
or some other misguided individual
who’s been roped in to act on the abuser’s behalf.
Targets are sent letters and emails
trying to plant insecurities in their minds
suggesting if they don’t come
back and try to work things out
they’ll be forever haunted by guilt
plagued by obsessive thoughts
unable to move on.
They’re told running away isn’t a solution
they’ll just carry the same
problems around with them
and none of their relationships will succeed.
Some targets even hear this kind of
doom-mongering from their therapists.
I strongly advise targets who do to get new ones
who’ve been trained in abusive relationships
and know what they’re talking about.
One of the many insidious myths about abuse
is that to resolve our feelings and experiences
we need our abusers’ participation.
We don’t.
And that reality is born out
by countless targets of abuse
who heal and move on with
no input from their abusers.
Targets generally have all
the information they need
— often an overabundance of it.
Resolution isn’t about getting more information
but processing the information
they already possess.
All the questions they have about their abuse
— all the whys and the hows —
are generally ones they can answer themselves.
Their abusers have no valuable insights to offer
and their participation just opens
the door to more manipulation.
And, just as targets don’t need
their abusers’ participation to heal
abusers don’t need their targets’ participation.
Just like targets, abusers have
all the information they need.
If they really want to heal,
no one’s stopping them.
When it comes to self-affirmation
targets and abusers are
divided by a common language.
Targets who use it to restore equality
find themselves in conflict with abusers
who twist it to demand special treatment.
It can catch targets off balance
having their own therapeutic concepts
and phrases used against them.
This kind of disorientation is common
in the bizarro world of the
abuser where nothing matches up.
Words don’t match actions.
Image doesn’t match content.
Targets need to cut to the underlying issue:
are everyone’s freedoms and
entitlements being acknowledged?
The answer to that question will clarify
whether the person is making
healthy reasonable demands
or weaponising self-affirmation.